feat: TELCO-939 Cups tutorial with Multipass (#182)
canonical/charmed-5g: docs/tutorials/mastering.md

# Mastering

In this tutorial, we will deploy and run the SD-Core 5G core network following Control and User Plane Separation (CUPS) principles. The radio and cell phone simulator will also be deployed on an isolated cluster. [Multipass](https://multipass.run/) is used to create separate VMs connected with [LXD](https://ubuntu.com/lxd) networking.

> ## 1. Prepare Host

Author: Done

A machine running Ubuntu 22.04 with the following resources:
  - At least one NIC with internet access
  - 8 cores
  - 24 GB RAM
  - 150 GiB disk  

### Networks

> The following networks will be used to create test environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following IP networks will be used to connect and isolate the network functions.
```

| Name | Subnet | Gateway IP |
| ---- | ------ | ---------- |
| `management` | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| `access`     | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

> Create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the host machine, create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml`.
```

Author: Done

```console

> cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml

Reviewer 2: We could give it `99-sdcore-networks.yaml` so it stands out.  We also need to remove this file in the cleanup

> cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml

Author: OK, we can lower the priority.

> cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml

Author: Done

# /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml
network:
  bridges:
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110
    access-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.202.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.204.0.0/24
          via: 10.202.0.1
    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1
          metric: 203
    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1

  version: 2
EOF
```

```console
sudo netplan apply
```

### Install and Configure LXD

> Install LXD:

Reviewer 3: There's a new line missing here (and also in other places). You might wanna run some Markdown formatter against this file.

Author: Fixed the linting issues by using `markdownlint`.

```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee ~/preseed.yaml
config: {}
networks: []
storage_pools:
- config:
    size: 150GiB
    source: /var/snap/lxd/common/lxd/disks/default.img
    zfs.pool_name: default
  description: ""
  name: default
  driver: zfs
profiles:
- config: {}
  description: Default LXD profile
  devices:
    root:
      path: /
      pool: default
      type: disk
  name: default
projects:
- config:
    features.images: "true"
    features.networks: "true"
    features.networks.zones: "true"
    features.profiles: "true"
    features.storage.buckets: "true"
    features.storage.volumes: "true"
  description: Default LXD project

>   name: default

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't a dedicated project be better choice here? What if someone is already using LXD for something else?

Author: OK, Changing project name as the one below:
  description: SD-Core project
  name: sdcore

EOF
```

```console
lxd init --preseed < ~/preseed.yaml 
```

### Install and configure Multipass

Install Multipass and set LXD as local driver:

```console
sudo snap install multipass
sudo multipass set local.driver=lxd
```
Wait a few seconds if you get the output: `set failed: cannot connect to the multipass socket` and retry to set local driver again.

> Check if local driver is set to lxd properly.

Author: Done

```console
$ sudo multipass get local.driver
lxd

> ```

Reviewer: Is this necessary? Some of these checks seem superfluous and make the tutorial longer.

Author: we can get rid of it

Author: Done

> Connect multipass to LXD.

Author: Done

```console
$ sudo snap connect multipass:lxd lxd
```

> Check multipass connections and make sure that `multipass:lxd` appears under Plug:

Author: Done

```console
$ sudo snap connections multipass
Interface          Plug                         Slot                Notes
lxd                multipass:lxd                lxd:lxd             -

> ```

Reviewer: Same comment as above

Author: Removed.

Set Multipass passphrase and authenticate:
```console
$ sudo multipass set local.passphrase
Please enter passphrase: <set_your_passphrase>
Please re-enter passphrase: <set_your_passphrase> 

$ multipass authenticate
Please enter passphrase: <your_passphrase>
```

> ## 2. Create VMs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Create virtual machines 
```

Author: Done

| User Plane Kubernetes Cluster        | 2    | 4g  | 20g  | `management`, `access`, `core` |
| Juju Controller + Kubernetes Cluster | 4    | 6g  | 40g  | `management`                   |
| gNB Simulator Kubernetes Cluster     | 2    | 3g  | 20g  | `management`, `ran`            |
| RAN Access Router                    | 1    | 1g  | 10g  | `management`, `ran` , `access` |
| Core Router                          | 1    | 1g  | 10g  | `management`, `core`           |

Create VMs with Multipass:

```console
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n dns --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 4 -m 8G -d 40G -n control-plane --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 2 -m 4G -d 20G -n user-plane  --network mgmt-br --network core-br --network access-br jammy
multipass launch -c 4 -m 6G -d 40G -n juju-controller --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 2 -m 3G -d 20G -n gnbsim --network mgmt-br --network ran-br jammy
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n ran-access-router --network mgmt-br --network ran-br --network access-br jammy
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n core-router --network mgmt-br --network core-br jammy
```

> Wait till all VMs become `Running` status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wait until all VMs are in a `Running` state.
```

Author: Done

                                          10.203.0.100
                                          10.202.0.100
                                          10.1.112.128
```

### IP Addresses

The following IP addresses are used in this tutorial and must be present in the DNS Server that all hosts are using.

| Name | IP Address   | Purpose |
| ---- |--------------| ------- |
| `juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.104 | Management address for Juju machine |
| `control-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.101 | Management address for control plane cluster machine |
| `user-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.102 | Management address for user plane cluster machine |
| `gnbsim.mgmt` | 10.201.0.103 | Management address for the gNB Simulator cluster machine |
| `api.juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.50  | Juju controller address |
| `cos.mgmt` | 10.201.0.51  | Canonical Observability Stack address |
| `amf.mgmt` | 10.201.0.52  | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the AMF |
| `control-plane-nms.control-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.53  | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the NMS |
| `upf.mgmt` | 10.201.0.200 | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the UPF |

> ### Install DNS Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install the DNS Server
```

Author: Done

> Log in to DNS VM.

Author: Done

```console
multipass shell dns
```

First, replace the content of `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` as following to configure mgmt interface ip address as `10.201.0.100`.

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.100/24
    version: 2
EOF
```

```console
sudo netplan apply
```

> Install DNS server:

Author: Done

```console
sudo apt update
sudo apt install dnsmasq -y
sudo systemctl disable systemd-resolved
sudo systemctl stop systemd-resolved
sudo systemctl restart dnsmasq
sudo systemctl status  dnsmasq
```

Configure dnsmasq:
```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee -a /etc/dnsmasq.conf
no-resolv
server=8.8.8.8
server=8.8.4.4
domain=mgmt
EOF
```

Add records under /etc/hosts:
```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts
10.201.0.104   juju-controller.mgmt
10.201.0.101   control-plane.mgmt
10.201.0.102   user-plane.mgmt
10.201.0.103   gnbsim.mgmt
10.201.0.50    api.juju-controller.mgmt
10.201.0.51    cos.mgmt
10.201.0.52    amf.mgmt
10.201.0.53    control-plane-nms.control-plane.mgmt
10.201.0.200   upf.mgmt
EOF
```

> Reload DNS configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reload the DNS configuration:
```

Author: Done

```console
sudo systemctl reload dnsmasq
```

Test the DNS resolution.
```console
$ dig upf.mgmt
; <<>> DiG 9.18.18-0ubuntu0.22.04.1-Ubuntu <<>> upf.mgmt
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 46312
;; flags: qr aa rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 1232
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;upf.mgmt.			IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
upf.mgmt.		0	IN	A	10.201.0.200

;; Query time: 0 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53) (UDP)
;; WHEN: Fri Dec 15 15:07:40 +03 2023
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 53
``` 

> ### Configure network of VMs to add DNS server and routes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add DNS server and routes to the other VM's
```

Author: Done

#### User-plane VM

Log in to user-plane VM.
```console
multipass shell user-plane
```

> Configure ip address for mgmt, core and access interfaces, add nameservers for "mgmt" interface and add route between Access to RAN network by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

Author: Done

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.102/24
            nameservers:
                search: [mgmt]
                addresses: [10.201.0.100]
            optional: true
        enp7s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.203.0.100/24
            optional: true
        enp8s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.202.0.100/24
            routes:
              - to: 10.204.0.0/24
                via: 10.202.0.1
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

> Run the command to make the new configuration become active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the network configuration.
```

Author: Done

 ```console
sudo netplan apply

>  ```

Reviewer: There's a space that shouldn't be there

Check the current DNS server.
```console
$ resolvectl
Link 3 (enp6s0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: +DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.201.0.100
       DNS Servers: 10.201.0.100
        DNS Domain: mgmt
```

Check the route from Access interface to RAN network.
```console
$ ip route
...
10.204.0.0/24 via 10.202.0.1 dev enp8s0 proto static
```

#### Control-plane VM

Log in to control-plane VM.

```console
multipass shell control-plane
```

> Configure ip address and nameservers for "mgmt" interface by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

Author: Done

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.101/24
            nameservers:
                search: [mgmt]
                addresses: [10.201.0.100]
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

> Run the command to make the new configuration become active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the network configuration.
```

Author: Done

 ```console
sudo netplan apply

>  ```

Reviewer: There's a space that shouldn't be there

Check the current DNS server.
```console
resolvectl
```

#### Gnbsim VM

Log in to gnbsim VM.

```console
multipass shell gnbsim
```

> Configure ip address for mgmt and ran interfaces, add nameservers for "mgmt" interface and add route between RAN to access network by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

Reviewer 3: There's actually a couple of similar sections that could use this kind of changes.

> Configure ip address for mgmt and ran interfaces, add nameservers for "mgmt" interface and add route between RAN to access network by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

Author: Done

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.103/24
            nameservers:
                search: [mgmt]
                addresses: [10.201.0.100]
            optional: true
        enp7s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.204.0.100/24
            routes:
              - to: 10.202.0.0/24
                via: 10.204.0.1
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

> Run the command to make the new configuration become active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the network configuration.
```

Author: Done

 ```console
sudo netplan apply

>  ```

Reviewer: There's a space that shouldn't be there

Author: Done

Check the current DNS server.
```console
resolvectl
```

Check the route from RAN interface to Access network.

```console
$ ip route
...
10.202.0.0/24 via 10.204.0.1 dev enp7s0 proto static 
```

#### Juju-controller VM

Log in to juju-controller VM.

```console
multipass shell juju-controller
```

Configure ip address and nameservers for "mgmt" interface by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.104/24
            nameservers:
                search: [mgmt]
                addresses: [10.201.0.100]
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

> Run the command to make the new configuration become active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the network configuration.
```

Author: Done

 ```console
sudo netplan apply

>  ```

Reviewer: There's a space that shouldn't be there

Check the current DNS server.
```console
resolvectl
```

#### RAN-access-router VM

Log in to ran-access-router VM.

```console
multipass shell ran-access-router
```

Configure ip address for mgmt, ran and access interfaces by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.110/24
            optional: true
        enp7s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.204.0.1/24
            optional: true
        enp8s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.202.0.1/24
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

> Run the command to make the new configuration become active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the network configuration.
```

Author: Done

 ```console
sudo netplan apply

>  ```

Reviewer: There's a space that shouldn't be there

Author: Done

The `access-gateway-ip` is expected to forward the packets from the `access-interface` to the `gnb-subnet`.

Set up IP forwarding

```console
echo net.ipv4.ip_forward=1 | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.conf
sudo sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
```

#### Core-router VM

Log in to core-router VM.

```console
multipass shell core-router
```

Configure ip address for mgmt and core interfaces by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.114/24
            optional: true
        enp7s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.203.0.1/24
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

> Run the command to make the new configuration become active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the network configuration.
```

Author: Done

 ```console
sudo netplan apply

>  ```

Reviewer: There's a space that shouldn't be there

Author: Done

Set up ip forwarding and NAT:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/rc.local
#!/bin/bash
iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -o enp5s0 -j MASQUERADE -s 10.203.0.0/24
EOF
sudo chmod +x /etc/rc.local
sudo /etc/rc.local
echo net.ipv4.ip_forward=1 | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.conf
sudo sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
```

## 3. Configure VMs for SD-Core Deployment

> This section covers how to install Juju and MicroK8s to act as the infrastructure for SD-Core. Besides, it also set up ssh keys between VMs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section covers setting up the SSH keys and installation of Juju and MicroK8s on VMs which are going to build up the infrastructure for SD-Core.
```

Author: Done

### Prepare SD-Core Control Plane VM

All commands in this section are run on the `control-plane` VM.

> Login `control-plane` VM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Log in to the `control-plane` VM.
```

Author: Done

# Mastering

> In this tutorial, we will deploy and run the SD-Core 5G core network in a single server following Control and User Plane Separation (CUPS) principles. The radio and cell phone simulator will also be deployed on an isolated cluster. [Multipass](https://multipass.run/) is used to create separate VMs connected with [LXD](https://ubuntu.com/lxd) networking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will deploy and run the SD-Core 5G core network following Control and User Plane Separation (CUPS) principles. The radio and cell phone simulator will also be deployed on an isolated cluster. [Multipass](https://multipass.run/) is used to create separate VMs connected with [LXD](https://ubuntu.com/lxd) networking.
```

Author: Done

## 1. Prepare Host

> This tutorial requires:
> - Ubuntu OS is running on host (preferably 22.04 or higher)
> - It has at least one NIC which has internet access
> - The host has free resources: 15 vCPUs, 25 GB RAM and 150 GiB disk 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A machine running Ubuntu 22.04 with the following resources:
  - At least one NIC with internet access
  - 15 core
  - 24 GB RAM
  - 150 GiB disk 
```

Reviewer 4: RAM and disk is definitely required, but we could lower the amount of cores to 8, as that will not prevent us from over provisioning the number of vCPUs.

Author: I agree @ghislainbourgeois. Although using 25 GB RAM, it's very slow while deploying the charms.

Author: CPU requirement is given as 8.

Author: Done

### Networks

The following networks will be used to create test environment.

| Name | Subnet | Gateway IP |
| ---- | ------ | ---------- |
| `management` | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| `access`     | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

> Create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml`. `enp4s0` is the sample interface used in this tutorial and replace the interface name and DHCP requirement according to your environment.

Reviewer 2: If this is on the host itself, we should not be touching their existing interface.  By creating a new netplan.yaml file, we can leave whatever the user already has configured in place and not have to worry about any of that, no?

> Create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml`. `enp4s0` is the sample interface used in this tutorial and replace the interface name and DHCP requirement according to your environment.

Author: Done

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml
# /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml
network:
  ethernets:
    enp4s0: # Set the correct interface name
      dhcp4: no # Set yes if dhcp4 assignment is required
      dhcp6: no # Set yes if dhcp6 assignment is required
  bridges:
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110
      interfaces:
        - vlan201
    access-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.202.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.204.0.0/24
          via: 10.202.0.1
      interfaces:
        - vlan202
    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1
          metric: 203
      interfaces:
        - vlan203
    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1
      interfaces:
        - vlan204

  vlans:
    vlan201:
      id: 201
      link: enp4s0
    vlan202:
      id: 202
      link: enp4s0
    vlan203:
      id: 203
      link: enp4s0
    vlan204:
      id: 204
      link: enp4s0

>   version: 2

Author: Done

>   version: 2

Author: If we set a host interface to the bridge, host loses its connection as enp4s0 loses its ip address. 

2: enp4s0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast master mgmt-br state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 04:7c:16:a8:c6:e9 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff

    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110
      interfaces:
        - enp4s0
    
I think we can only define bridges without linking to any host network interface.

- Loop device size should be enough to launch all VMs
- New lxd bridge should not be created.

Use default settings for other configurations.

```console
$ lxd init
Would you like to use LXD clustering? (yes/no) [default=no]: 
Do you want to configure a new storage pool? (yes/no) [default=yes]: 
Name of the new storage pool [default=default]: 
Name of the storage backend to use (dir, lvm, zfs, btrfs, ceph) [default=zfs]: 
Create a new ZFS pool? (yes/no) [default=yes]: 
Would you like to use an existing empty block device (e.g. a disk or partition)? (yes/no) [default=no]: 
Size in GiB of the new loop device (1GiB minimum) [default=30GiB]: 150GiB
Would you like to connect to a MAAS server? (yes/no) [default=no]: 
Would you like to create a new local network bridge? (yes/no) [default=yes]: no
What IPv4 address should be used? (CIDR subnet notation, “auto” or “none”) [default=auto]: 
What IPv6 address should be used? (CIDR subnet notation, “auto” or “none”) [default=auto]: 
Would you like the LXD server to be available over the network? (yes/no) [default=no]: 
Would you like stale cached images to be updated automatically? (yes/no) [default=yes]: 

> Would you like a YAML "lxd init" preseed to be printed? (yes/no) [default=no]: 

Reviewer: Can't we use a complete lxd init command instead of using the interactive mode?

Author: Yes, we configure it by using a preseed.yaml.

Author: Done

```

### Install and configure Multipass

Install Multipass and set LXD as local driver:

```console
sudo snap install multipass
sudo multipass set local.driver=lxd
```
Wait a few seconds if you get the output: `set failed: cannot connect to the multipass socket` and retry to set local driver again.

Check if local driver is set to lxd properly.
```console
$ sudo multipass get local.driver
lxd
```

Connect multipass to LXD.
```console
$ sudo snap connect multipass:lxd lxd
```

Check multipass connections and make sure that `multipass:lxd` appears under Plug:
```console
$ sudo snap connections multipass
Interface          Plug                         Slot                Notes
lxd                multipass:lxd                lxd:lxd             -
```

Set Multipass passphrase and authenticate:
```console
$ sudo multipass set local.passphrase
Please enter passphrase: <set_your_passphrase>
Please re-enter passphrase: <set_your_passphrase> 

$ multipass authenticate
Please enter passphrase: <your_passphrase>

> ```

Reviewer: Are those necessary for a tutorial?

Author: yes, they are required. Otherwise we will get following error.
```
launch failed: The client is not authenticated with the Multipass service.
Please use 'multipass authenticate' before proceeding.
```

$ resolvectl
Link 3 (enp6s0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: +DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.201.0.100
       DNS Servers: 10.201.0.100
        DNS Domain: mgmt
```

Check the route from Access interface to RAN network.
```console
$ ip route
...
10.204.0.0/24 via 10.202.0.1 dev enp8s0 proto static
```

#### Control-plane VM

Log in to control-plane VM.

```console
multipass exec control-plane -- bash
```

Configure ip address and nameservers for "mgmt" interface by replacing the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.101/24
            nameservers:
                search: [mgmt]
                addresses: [10.201.0.100]
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

Then, run the command to make the new configuration become active.
 ```console
sudo netplan apply
 ```

Check the current DNS server.
```console
resolvectl
```

#### Gnbsim VM

Log in to gnbsim VM.

```console

> multipass exec gnbsim -- bash

Author: That could be an alternative.

> multipass exec gnbsim -- bash

Author: Done

The following IP networks will be used to connect and isolate the network functions.

| Name | Subnet | Gateway IP |
| ---- | ------ | ---------- |
| `management` | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| `access`     | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

On the host machine, create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml`.

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
# /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
network:
  bridges:
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110
    access-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.202.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.204.0.0/24
          via: 10.202.0.1
    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1
          metric: 203
    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1

  version: 2
EOF
```

Apply the network configuration.

```console

> sudo netplan apply

Author: Done

> sudo netplan apply

Reviewer 3: Exactly, that's why I mentioned the heads-up part. Something like "don't worry about the warnings, it's normal".

> sudo netplan apply

Author: Added a ` do not worry` note.

```

### Install and Configure LXD

Install LXD:

```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee ~/preseed.yaml
config: {}
networks: []
storage_pools:
- config:
    size: 150GiB
    source: /var/snap/lxd/common/lxd/disks/default.img
    zfs.pool_name: default
  description: ""

>   name: default

Author: ```
config: {}
networks: []
storage_pools:
- config:
    size: 150GiB
    source: /var/snap/lxd/common/lxd/disks/sdcore.img
    zfs.pool_name: sdcore
  description: ""
  name: sdcore
  driver: zfs
profiles:
- config: {}
  description: Default LXD profile
  devices:
    root:
      path: /
      pool: sdcore
      type: disk
  name: default
projects:
- config:
    features.images: "true"
    features.networks: "true"
    features.networks.zones: "true"
    features.profiles: "true"
    features.storage.buckets: "true"
    features.storage.volumes: "true"
  description: Default LXD project
  name: default
  ```

>   name: default

Author: Creating custom storage pool as above and worked although LXD initialized before.

>   name: default

Author: Done

>   name: default

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should do the same for the project then in case it's already been created too?

>   name: default

Author: We changed it to create sdcore project similar to below:

lxc storage create sdcore zfs size=150GiB
lxc project create sdcore --config features.images=true --config features.networks=true --config features.networks.zones=true --config features.profiles=true --config features.storage.buckets=true --config features.storage.volumes=true

cat << EOF | sudo tee ~/preseed.yaml
config: {}
networks: []
storage_pools:
- config:
    size: 150GiB
    source: /var/snap/lxd/common/lxd/disks/sdcore.img
    zfs.pool_name: sdcore
  description: ""
  name: sdcore
  driver: zfs
profiles:
- config: {}
  description: Default LXD profile
  devices:
    root:
      path: /
      pool: sdcore
      type: disk
  name: default
projects:
- config:
    features.images: "true"
    features.networks: "true"
    features.networks.zones: "true"
    features.profiles: "true"
    features.storage.buckets: "true"
    features.storage.volumes: "true"
  description: sdcore project
  name: sdcore
EOF

lxd init --preseed < ~/preseed.yaml

  driver: zfs
profiles:
- config: {}
  description: Default LXD profile
  devices:
    root:
      path: /
      pool: default
      type: disk
  name: default
projects:
- config:
    features.images: "true"
    features.networks: "true"

>     features.networks.zones: "true"

Author: We can keep default project.

>     features.networks.zones: "true"

Author: Custom LXD project named as sdcore will be used.

    features.profiles: "true"

>     features.storage.buckets: "true"

Reviewer 3: After changing project name back to `default` (see the comment above), on a fresh host, I'm getting:
```bash
ubuntu@ip-172-31-35-202:~$ lxd init --preseed < ~/preseed.yaml 
Error: Failed to update local member project "default": Invalid project configuration key "features.storage.buckets"
```

Reviewer 3: I still don't think we wanna use the default project. I think we need to figure out how to handle project creation nicely.

Author: Custom LXD project and storage pool creation is added.

## 1. Prepare the Host machine

A machine running Ubuntu 22.04 with the following resources:

- At least one NIC with internet access
- 8 cores
- 24 GB RAM
- 150 GiB disk  

### Networks

The following IP networks will be used to connect and isolate the network functions.

| Name | Subnet | Gateway IP |
| ---- | ------ | ---------- |
| `management` | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| `access`     | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

On the host machine, create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml`.

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
# /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
network:
  bridges:
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1

>           metric: 110

Author: The explanation is added to change the metrics values if necessary.

>           metric: 110

Author: Done

    access-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.202.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.204.0.0/24
          via: 10.202.0.1
    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1

>           metric: 203

Author: Done

    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1

  version: 2
EOF
```

Arrange the file permissions and apply the network configuration.

```console
sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
sudo netplan apply
```

```{note}

> If you encounter some warnings which are telling that any netplan file permissions are too open, please disregard.

Author: Done

```

### Install and Configure LXD

Install LXD:

```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

Create custom storage pool and LXD project:
```console
lxc storage create sdcore zfs size=150GiB

> lxc project create sdcore --config features.images=true --config features.networks=true --config features.networks.zones=true --config features.profiles=true --config features.storage.buckets=true --config features.storage.volumes=true

Author: I also do not know the reason of that error. I searched a bit could not find a strong answer. I asked through the that thread https://chat.canonical.com/canonical/pl/n8qtfaoimty4fnahpu8xfzbubo

> lxc project create sdcore --config features.images=true --config features.networks=true --config features.networks.zones=true --config features.profiles=true --config features.storage.buckets=true --config features.storage.volumes=true

Author: LXD 5.0  stable does not support features.network.zones. If the LXD does not track latest/stable, we need to omit features.networks.zone from project configuration.

> lxc project create sdcore --config features.images=true --config features.networks=true --config features.networks.zones=true --config features.profiles=true --config features.storage.buckets=true --config features.storage.volumes=true

Author: Done

```

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee ~/preseed.yaml
config: {}
networks: []
storage_pools:
- config:
    size: 150GiB
    source: /var/snap/lxd/common/lxd/disks/sdcore.img
    zfs.pool_name: sdcore
  description: ""
  name: sdcore
  driver: zfs
profiles:
- config: {}
  description: Default LXD profile
  devices:
    root:
      path: /
      pool: sdcore
      type: disk
  name: default
projects:
- config:
    features.images: "true"
    features.networks: "true"
    features.networks.zones: "true"
    features.profiles: "true"
    features.storage.buckets: "true"
    features.storage.volumes: "true"

>   description: sdcore project

Author: Done

  name: sdcore
EOF
```

```console
lxd init --preseed < ~/preseed.yaml 
```

### Install and configure Multipass

Install Multipass and set LXD as local driver:

```console
sudo snap install multipass

> sudo multipass set local.driver=lxd

Author: I changed the command as `multipass set local.driver=lxd` and we can still perform all the necessary steps.  After changing command, we can also remove 'multipass authenticate'.  This is also being removed.

> sudo multipass set local.driver=lxd

Author: Done

| User Plane Kubernetes Cluster        | 2    | 4g  | 20g  | `management`, `access`, `core` |
| Juju Controller + Kubernetes Cluster | 4    | 6g  | 40g  | `management`                   |
| gNB Simulator Kubernetes Cluster     | 2    | 3g  | 20g  | `management`, `ran`            |
| RAN Access Router                    | 1    | 1g  | 10g  | `management`, `ran` , `access` |
| Core Router                          | 1    | 1g  | 10g  | `management`, `core`           |

Create VMs with Multipass:

```console
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n dns --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 4 -m 8G -d 40G -n control-plane --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 2 -m 4G -d 20G -n user-plane  --network mgmt-br --network core-br --network access-br jammy
multipass launch -c 4 -m 6G -d 40G -n juju-controller --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 2 -m 3G -d 20G -n gnbsim --network mgmt-br --network ran-br jammy
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n ran-access-router --network mgmt-br --network ran-br --network access-br jammy
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n core-router --network mgmt-br --network core-br jammy
```

Wait until all VMs are in a `Running` state.

```console

> $ multipass list

Author: Changed. Done.

| Name | IP Address   | Purpose |
| ---- |--------------| ------- |
| `juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.104 | Management address for Juju machine |
| `control-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.101 | Management address for control plane cluster machine |
| `user-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.102 | Management address for user plane cluster machine |
| `gnbsim.mgmt` | 10.201.0.103 | Management address for the gNB Simulator cluster machine |
| `api.juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.50  | Juju controller address |
| `cos.mgmt` | 10.201.0.51  | Canonical Observability Stack address |
| `amf.mgmt` | 10.201.0.52  | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the AMF |
| `control-plane-nms.control-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.53  | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the NMS |
| `upf.mgmt` | 10.201.0.200 | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the UPF |

### Install the DNS Server

Log in to the `dns` VM.

```console
multipass shell dns
```

First, replace the content of `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` as following to configure `mgmt` interface IP address as `10.201.0.100`.

```console

> cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml

Author: Added. Done

network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.100/24
    version: 2
EOF
```

Apply the network configuration.

```console
sudo netplan apply
```

Install the DNS server:

```console
sudo apt update
sudo apt install dnsmasq -y
sudo systemctl disable systemd-resolved
sudo systemctl stop systemd-resolved
sudo systemctl restart dnsmasq

> sudo systemctl status  dnsmasq

Author: yes, I will add a note that service should be up and running.

> sudo systemctl status  dnsmasq

Author: Done

## 1. Prepare Host

A machine running Ubuntu 22.04 with the following resources:
  - At least one NIC with internet access
  - 8 cores
  - 24 GB RAM
  - 150 GiB disk  

### Networks

The following networks will be used to create test environment.

| Name | Subnet | Gateway IP |
| ---- | ------ | ---------- |
| `management` | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| `access`     | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

Create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml`. `enp4s0` is the name of the interface used in this tutorial, but you should replace it and the DHCP settings according to your environment.

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml
# /etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml
network:
  ethernets:

>     enp4s0: # Set the correct interface name

Reviewer 2: I am getting so confused by GitHub.  I swear I already stated this somewhere, but cannot find my comment anymore.

As this is on the host, and we are creating a new netplan .yaml file, we should not repeat the user's ethernet configuration here.  Lines 31-34 can be removed

Author: 50-sdcore-networks.yaml is a new file that we are creating. 
As enp4s0 is referenced in mgmt-br, we can not remove interface name. 
```
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110
      interfaces:
        - enp4s0
```
Otherwise we will get following error:
```
/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml:3:3: Error in network definition: unknown key 'network'
  network:
```

Author: I am removing ethernets: section together with interfaces  for mgmt-bridge which seems useless.

Author: Done

      dhcp4: no # Set yes if dhcp4 assignment is required
      dhcp6: no # Set yes if dhcp6 assignment is required
  bridges:
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110
      interfaces:

>         - enp4s0

Reviewer 2: We can replace all enp4s0 with a `${SHELL_VARIABLE}` that we set once before the `cat` command.

    access-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.202.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.204.0.0/24
          via: 10.202.0.1
    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1
          metric: 203
    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1

  version: 2
EOF
```

```console
sudo netplan apply
```

### Install and Configure LXD

Install LXD:
```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee ~/preseed.yaml
config: {}
networks:
- config:
    ipv4.address: 10.5.133.1/24
    ipv4.nat: "true"
    ipv6.address: fd42:5acb:5f42:9256::1/64
    ipv6.nat: "true"

>   description: Network bridge for Multipass

Reviewer 2: Do we need to pre-create network config for multipass?

Author: We do not need. The initial configuration is simplified with the latest patch.

Author: Done

    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1
          metric: 203 // Set the value higher than your mgmt-br route's metric
    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1

  version: 2
EOF
```

Arrange the file permissions and apply the network configuration.

```console
sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
sudo netplan apply
```

```{note}
Applying new netplan configuration may produce warnings related to file permissions being too open. You may safely disregard them.
```

### Install and Configure LXD

Install LXD:

```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

Create custom storage pool and LXD project:

```console
lxc storage create sdcore zfs size=150GiB
lxc project create sdcore --config features.images=true --config features.networks=true --config features.networks.zones=true --config features.profiles=true --config features.storage.buckets=true --config features.storage.volumes=true
```

```{note}
If the LXD version is lower than 5.9, please remove the key `features.networks.zones` from the project configuration.

> ```

Author: Done

| Juju Controller + Kubernetes Cluster | 4    | 6g  | 40g  | `management`                   |
| gNB Simulator Kubernetes Cluster     | 2    | 3g  | 20g  | `management`, `ran`            |
| RAN Access Router                    | 1    | 1g  | 10g  | `management`, `ran` , `access` |
| Core Router                          | 1    | 1g  | 10g  | `management`, `core`           |

Create VMs with Multipass:

```console
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n dns --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 4 -m 8G -d 40G -n control-plane --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 2 -m 4G -d 20G -n user-plane  --network mgmt-br --network core-br --network access-br jammy
multipass launch -c 4 -m 6G -d 40G -n juju-controller --network mgmt-br jammy
multipass launch -c 2 -m 3G -d 20G -n gnbsim --network mgmt-br --network ran-br jammy
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n ran-access-router --network mgmt-br --network ran-br --network access-br jammy
multipass launch -c 1 -m 1G -d 10G -n core-router --network mgmt-br --network core-br jammy
```

Wait until all VMs are in a `Running` state.

### Checkpoint 1: Are the VM's ready ?

> You should be able to see all the VMs in a `Running` state with their default IP address.

Author: Done

```console
$ multipass list
Name                    State             IPv4             Image
juju-controller         Running           10.231.204.5     Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
core-router             Running           10.231.204.200   Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
control-plane           Running           10.231.204.202   Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
dns                     Running           10.231.204.96    Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
gnbsim                  Running           10.231.204.24    Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
ran-access-router       Running           10.231.204.220   Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
user-plane              Running           10.231.204.121   Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
```

> ### IP Addresses

Author: OK, moved the IP list under DNS Server part.

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.100/24
    version: 2
EOF
```

Apply the network configuration.

```console
sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
sudo netplan apply
```

Install the DNS server:

```console
sudo apt update
sudo apt install dnsmasq -y
sudo systemctl disable systemd-resolved
sudo systemctl stop systemd-resolved
sudo systemctl restart dnsmasq
```

Configure dnsmasq:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee -a /etc/dnsmasq.conf
no-resolv
server=8.8.8.8
server=8.8.4.4
domain=mgmt
EOF
```

Add records under /etc/hosts:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts
10.201.0.104   juju-controller.mgmt
10.201.0.101   control-plane.mgmt
10.201.0.102   user-plane.mgmt
10.201.0.103   gnbsim.mgmt
10.201.0.50    api.juju-controller.mgmt
10.201.0.51    cos.mgmt
10.201.0.52    amf.mgmt
10.201.0.53    control-plane-nms.control-plane.mgmt
10.201.0.200   upf.mgmt
EOF
```

Reload the DNS configuration:

```console
sudo systemctl reload dnsmasq
```

> ### Checkpoint 2: Is the DNS service running ?

Author: Combined 2 checkpoints related with DNS.

    Process: 2628 ExecStartPost=/etc/init.d/dnsmasq systemd-start-resolvconf (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
```

### Checkpoint 3: Is the DNS server resolving properly ?

Test the DNS resolution and expect that the Nameserver is able to resolve the registered host names.

```console
$ dig upf.mgmt
; <<>> DiG 9.18.18-0ubuntu0.22.04.1-Ubuntu <<>> upf.mgmt
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 46312
;; flags: qr aa rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 1232
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;upf.mgmt.   IN A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
upf.mgmt.  0 IN A 10.201.0.200

;; Query time: 0 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53) (UDP)
;; WHEN: Fri Dec 15 15:07:40 +03 2023
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 53
```

### Add DNS server and routes to the other VM's

#### User-plane VM

Log in to the `user-plane` VM.

```console
multipass shell user-plane
```

Configure IP address for `mgmt`, `core` and `access` interfaces, add nameservers for the `mgmt` interface and add route from `access` to `ran` network by replacing the content of `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` as following:

```console

> cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml

Author: Done

# /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
network:
  bridges:
    mgmt-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.201.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.201.0.1
          metric: 110 # Set the value higher than your default route's metric
    access-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.202.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.204.0.0/24
          via: 10.202.0.1
    core-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.203.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.203.0.1
          metric: 203 # Set the value higher than your mgmt-br route's metric
    ran-br:
      addresses:
        - 10.204.0.14/24
      routes:
        - to: 10.202.0.0/24
          via: 10.204.0.1

  version: 2
EOF
```

Arrange the file permissions and apply the network configuration.

```console
sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
sudo netplan apply
```

```{note}
Applying new netplan configuration may produce warnings related to file permissions being too open. You may safely disregard them.
```

### Install and Configure LXD

Install LXD:

```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

Create custom storage pool and LXD project:

```console
lxc storage create sdcore zfs size=150GiB

> lxc project create sdcore --config features.images=true --config features.networks=true --config features.networks.zones=true --config features.profiles=true --config features.storage.buckets=true --config features.storage.volumes=true

Reviewer 3: Actually, the note about the LXD version should go under this line.
```note
When using LXD version lower than 5.9, the command above will produce the following error:
> Error: Invalid project configuration key "features.networks.zones"
Please upgrade your LXD to the latest version or remove unsupported config from the command.
```

Author: Done

```

> Create the configuration to initialize the LXD. If the LXD version is lower than 5.9, you should remove the `features.networks.zones` key from the project configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create the configuration to initialize the LXD.
```

Author: I think we can keep that sentence here as we are removing the note.

Reviewer 3: Actually, we're moving the note up - right after the first occurrence on the  `features.networks.zones` config (please see the next comment.

Author: Done

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee ~/preseed.yaml
config: {}
networks: []
storage_pools:
- config:
    size: 150GiB
    source: /var/snap/lxd/common/lxd/disks/sdcore.img
    zfs.pool_name: sdcore
  description: ""
  name: sdcore
  driver: zfs
profiles:
- config: {}
  description: Default LXD profile
  devices:
    root:
      path: /
      pool: sdcore
      type: disk
  name: default
projects:
- config:
    features.images: "true"
    features.networks: "true"
    features.networks.zones: "true" # Omit this if LXD version is lower than 5.9.
    features.profiles: "true"
    features.storage.buckets: "true"
    features.storage.volumes: "true"
  description: SD-Core project
  name: sdcore
EOF
```

```console
lxd init --preseed < ~/preseed.yaml 
```

```{note}
If you get an error which says that `features.networks.zones` is not supported, please remove that key and apply the configuration again.

> ```

Reviewer 3: Please see the comment about the placement of this note above.

Author: Removed note.

| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

## Prepare Host

> Create local network bridges to be used by LXD later.

Reviewer 2: Is this being run on the host?  We cannot assume enp4s0 is everyone's NIC, and that they are using DHCP.  Instead, we should create a new netplan yaml (like `/etc/netplan/50-sdcore-networks.yaml`) that contains only what we need (bridges, etc)

Author: We use a netplan yaml which has a custom name. I agree. The interface name and DHCP configuration will be special to user environment. I added a comment to customize those settings according to requirement.

Author: Done

                                          10.1.112.128
```

### IP Addresses
The following IP addresses are used in this tutorial and must be present in the DNS Server that all hosts are using.

| Name | IP Address   | Purpose |
| ---- |--------------| ------- |
| `juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.104 | Management address for Juju machine |
| `juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.104 | Management address for Juju machine |
| `control-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.101 | Management address for control plane cluster machine |
| `user-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.102 | Management address for user plane cluster machine |
| `gnbsim.mgmt` | 10.201.0.103 | Management address for the gNB Simulator cluster machine |
| `api.juju-controller.mgmt` | 10.201.0.50  | Juju controller address |
| `cos.mgmt` | 10.201.0.51  | Canonical Observability Stack address |
| `amf.mgmt` | 10.201.0.52  | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the AMF |
| `control-plane-nms.control-plane.mgmt` | 10.201.0.53  | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the NMS |
| `upf.mgmt` | 10.201.0.200 | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the UPF |

### Install DNS Server

> First, replace the content of /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml as following to configure mgmt interface ip address as `10.201.0.100`.

Reviewer 2: Why don't we use DHCP for this?  Is there no way to assign IP addresses in LXD?

Author: At the moment, auto ip assignment does not work for me for bridge networks. I asked through the link:
https://chat.canonical.com/canonical/pl/i4yoqebd57yo3gtr1w6whxtzqy

Author: DHCP client runs on the first NIC only, the netplan needs to be configured in the Multipass VMs to run the DHCP clients for the other NICs.  I think, manual ip configuration seems more appropriate here as we need to know this specific ip to configure the nameserver in other VMs.

Reviewer 2: I see.  This is where cloud-init and friends come in.  All that is easily doable via openstack, so I had hoped there would be a way to do it with multipass

```

Add `conrol-plane` VM public key under `juju-controller` VM's authorized_keys. Please copy the public key below. 
```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee -a .ssh/authorized_keys
<copy the public key here>
EOF
```
Switch back to control-plane VM.
Export the Kubernetes configuration and copy that to the controller:

```console
$ sudo microk8s.config > control-plane-cluster.yaml
$ scp control-plane-cluster.yaml juju-controller.mgmt:
The authenticity of host 'juju-controller.mgmt (10.201.0.104)' can't be established.
ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:VziKoqhOg/ie+wQu9l84OX4HrnsqfgTkawkd73DPirY.
This key is not known by any other names
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'juju-controller.mgmt' (ED25519) to the list of known hosts.
control-plane-cluster.yaml 
```

Change coredns configmap by adding local dns server which is `10.201.0.100`.

Append the following lines in configmap/coredns at the end of Corefile section.

```yaml
mgmt:53 {
     errors
     cache 30
     forward . 10.201.0.100
}
```

Edit configmap by running:
```console
microk8s.kubectl -n kube-system edit configmap/coredns
```

> After modification, the configmap looks like below yaml:

Author: Done

This key is not known by any other names
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'juju-controller.mgmt' (ED25519) to the list of known hosts.
control-plane-cluster.yaml 
```

Change `coredns` configmap by adding local DNS server which is `10.201.0.100`.

Append the following lines in `configmap/coredns` at the end of `Corefile` section.

```yaml
mgmt:53 {
     errors
     cache 30
     forward . 10.201.0.100
}
```

Edit configmap by running:

```console
microk8s.kubectl -n kube-system edit configmap/coredns
```

After modification, the configmap looks like the one below:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  Corefile: |
    .:53 {
        errors
        health {
          lameduck 5s
        }
        ready
        log . {
          class error
        }
        kubernetes cluster.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
          pods insecure
          fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
        }
        prometheus :9153
        forward . 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4
        cache 30
        loop
        reload
        loadbalance
    }
    mgmt:53 {
         errors
         cache 30

>          forward . 10.201.0.100

Author: Done

scp control-plane-cluster.yaml juju-controller.mgmt:
```

Set alias for kubectl:
```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee -a ~/.bashrc

> alias kubectl="microk8s.kubectl"

Reviewer 2: Do this once after installing microk8s instead of adding it to .bashrc
`sudo snap alias microk8s.kubectl kubectl`

Author: This is a small facility to run the kubectl commands. I thought the possibility of opening new sessions.  Maybe we can remove it.

Author: Done

EOF
source ~/.bashrc
```

> Change coredns configmap by adding local dns server which is `10.201.0.100`.

Reviewer 2: What about `sudo microk8s enable dns:10.201.0.100`?

Author: Configuring 10.201.0.100 as primary dns does not work for us. Our local dns server should be configured as domain based, otherwise pods can not solve external domain names.

Reviewer 2: dnsmasq is a caching DNS server, so it will resolve based on what upstream DNS server you configure.  Or perhaps I don't understand what you mean by it can not solve external domain names?

Author: If we enable microk8s dns, 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4 are default nameservers. However, if we run `sudo microk8s enable dns:10.201.0.100`, 10.201.0.100 will be the default nameserver. In that case, pods can not pull the images as they are not resolved properly.
```
data:
  Corefile: |
    .:53 {
        errors
        health {
          lameduck 5s
        }
        ready
        log . {
          class error
        }
        kubernetes cluster.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
          pods insecure
          fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
        }
        prometheus :9153
        forward . 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4
        cache 30
        loop
        reload
        loadbalance
    }
    ```

Reviewer 2: I still fail to understand why we need to specify a different DNS server as I've never had to do this in any of my testing.

Author: Could you please send me the content of the /etc/dnsmasq.conf file in your dns server ?

Author: no-resolv
server=8.8.8.8
server=8.8.4.4
domain=mgmt

Author: Although I set Google DNS servers in the config file, if our local dns is the default one, it fails to resolve external domain names such as (charmhub, dockerhub, etc.)

Author: That is the reason I do keep the default nameservers as Google DNS servers and set the local dns server just for mgmt domain.

        log . {
          class error
        }
        kubernetes cluster.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
          pods insecure
          fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
        }
        prometheus :9153
        forward . 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4
        cache 30
        loop
        reload
        loadbalance
    }
    mgmt:53 {
         errors
         cache 30
         forward . 10.201.0.100
    }
kind: ConfigMap
```

In this guide, the following network interfaces are available on the gNB Simulator machine:

| Interface Name | Purpose                                                                         |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| enp6s0           | internal Kubernetes management interface. This maps to the `management` subnet. |
| enp7s0           | ran interface. This maps to the `ran` subnet.                                   |

Now we create the MACVLAN bridges for enp7s0, and label them accordingly:

```console
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/rc.local
#!/bin/bash

sudo ip link add ran link enp7s0 type macvlan mode bridge
sudo ip link set dev ran up
EOF
sudo chmod +x /etc/rc.local
sudo /etc/rc.local
```

> ### Prepare Juju Controller VM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prepare the Juju Controller VM
```

Author: Done

> Login `juju-controller` VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Login in the `juju-controller` VM.
```

Reviewer 2: Login `to` the ...

Author: Done

ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:VziKoqhOg/ie+wQu9l84OX4HrnsqfgTkawkd73DPirY.
This key is not known by any other names
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'juju-controller.mgmt' (ED25519) to the list of known hosts.
gnb-cluster.yaml
```

Change coredns configmap by adding local DNS server which is `10.201.0.100`.

Append the following lines in `configmap/coredns` at the end of `Corefile` section.

```yaml
mgmt:53 {
     errors
     cache 30
     forward . 10.201.0.100
}
```

Edit configmap by running:

```console
microk8s.kubectl -n kube-system edit configmap/coredns
```

After modification, the configmap looks like the one below:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  Corefile: |
    .:53 {
        errors
        health {
          lameduck 5s
        }
        ready
        log . {
          class error
        }
        kubernetes cluster.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
          pods insecure
          fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
        }
        prometheus :9153
        forward . 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4
        cache 30
        loop
        reload
        loadbalance
    }
    mgmt:53 {
         errors
         cache 30

>          forward . 10.201.0.100

Author: Done

data:
  Corefile: |
    .:53 {
        errors
        health {
          lameduck 5s
        }
        ready
        log . {
          class error
        }
        kubernetes cluster.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
          pods insecure
          fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
        }
        prometheus :9153
        forward . 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4
        cache 30
        loop
        reload
        loadbalance
    }
    mgmt:53 {
         errors
         cache 30
         forward . 10.201.0.100
    }
kind: ConfigMap
```
You may now proceed to deploy the SD-Core Control Plane and SD-Core User Plane

## 4. Deploy SD-Core Control Plane

The following steps build on the Juju controller which was bootstrapped and knows how to manage the SD-Core Control Plane Kubernetes cluster.

First, create a Juju overlay file that specifies the Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF) host name and IP address for sharing with the radios. This host name must be resolvable by the gNB and the IP address must be reachable and resolve to the AMF unit. In the bootstrap step, we set the Control Plane MetalLB range to start at `10.201.0.52`, so that is what we use in the configuration.

> Run the commands on `juju-controller` VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the Juju overlay file on the `juju-controller` VM.
```

Author: Done

juju add-k8s gnb-cluster --controller sdcore
```

Change coredns configmap by adding local DNS server which is `10.201.0.100`.

Append the following lines in `configmap/coredns` at the end of `Corefile` section.

```yaml
mgmt:53 {
     errors
     cache 30
     forward . 10.201.0.100
}
```

Edit configmap by running:

```console
microk8s.kubectl -n kube-system edit configmap/coredns
```

After modification, the configmap looks like the one below:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  Corefile: |
    .:53 {
        errors
        health {
          lameduck 5s
        }
        ready
        log . {
          class error
        }
        kubernetes cluster.local in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa {
          pods insecure
          fallthrough in-addr.arpa ip6.arpa
        }
        prometheus :9153
        forward . 8.8.8.8 8.8.4.4
        cache 30
        loop
        reload
        loadbalance
    }
    mgmt:53 {
         errors
         cache 30

>          forward . 10.201.0.100

Author: Done

```

Deploy the control plane Juju bundle:

```console

> juju deploy sdcore-control-plane-k8s --trust --channel=edge --overlay control-plane-overlay.yaml

Reviewer 3: And `sdcore-gnbsim-k8s` as well :)

> juju deploy sdcore-control-plane-k8s --trust --channel=edge --overlay control-plane-overlay.yaml

Author: Done

juju offer control-plane.amf:fiveg-n2
```

> ### Checkpoint 1

Author: I added more checkpoints.

> ### Checkpoint 1

Author: Done

You should be able to see the AMF External load balancer service in Kubernetes. Log in to the `control-plane` VM and execute the following command:

```console
multipass shell control-plane
microk8s.kubectl get services -A | grep LoadBalancer
```

This will show output similar to the following, indicating:

- The AMF is exposed on 10.201.0.100 SCTP port 38412

> - The NMS is exposed on 10.201.0.101 TCP ports 80 and 443

Author: Done

- `core-ip`: the IP address for the UPF to use on the `core` subnet
- `gnb-subnet`: the subnet CIDR where the gNB radios are reachable.

> Run the commands on `juju-controller` VM.

Reviewer: Generally speaking, avoid repeating the "run the command" sentence, instead write what exactly is being done (ex. `create the Juju overlay file on the Juju controller VM`)

Author: Done

The next steps are performed using a web browser to navigate to the NMS at http://control-plane-nms.control-plane.mgmt/

```{note}

> The computer that is running the web browser must also use the same DNS server as the rest of the environment !!

Reviewer 2: We could probably just use `.nip.io` here like we did for the Getting Started.

Author: OK

Author: Done

- run a simulation testing data flow through the 5g core
- view the metrics produced by the 5g core

## 11. Cleaning up

Juju makes it simple to cleanly remove all the deployed applications by simply removing the model itself. To completely remove all deployments, use the following:

```bash

> juju destroy-controller --destroy-all-models sdcore

Author: Added.

sudo snap remove microk8s
```

You may wish to reboot the Multipass VMs to ensure no residual network configurations remain.

Multipass VMs also can be deleted from the host machine:

```console
multipass delete --all
```

If required, all the VMs can be permanently removed:

```console
multipass purge

> ```

Author: Added LXD storage pool and project removal steps.
